
Recommended subset so far: Chapters 1, 2, 8--11

# Preface

Seems skippable. Can we acknowledge genetic predispositions without falling into racism and sexism? Find out in this book.

# Part I
## 1. the official theory
Pinker mentions a few philosophers of centuries past:

* Rosseau, who wrote of what we call the noble savage
* Locke, who wrote of what we call the blank slate (tabula rasa)
* Descartes, who wrote of what we now call a soul; Pinker likes the term Ghost in the Machine

To this point the terms embody cartoon concepts, if only because they're being written about by people
who predate almost all of modern science.

## 2. Silly putty
First part discusses the advent in the early 1900s of stimulus-response experiments that showed
just how malleable certain behaviors can be. He then presents a series of commentators who say
things about how so much is explained by stimulus-response.

Second part talks culture, which is the source of so many stimuli. He puts forth a page of authors
of scientific and fictional works, mostly from the 1930s to 1970s, talking about how our personalities
are determined by cultural context.

## 3. The last wall to fall

In which Pinker starts to rebut the cartoon concepts in earnest.

Here's Pinker's outline for the chapter:

* the science of the mind, cognitive science
  * The mental world can be grounded in the physical world by the concepts of
  information, computation, and feedback.
  * The mind cannot be a blank slate, because blank slates don't do anything.
    * Here, he introduces the East Pole (MIT), where there is little innate structure 
      to the brain and everything is learned,  and the West Pole (UCSD) where the brain
      has a good amount of structure before it gets to learning.
  * An infinite range of behavior can be generated by finite combinatorial programs in the
  mind. I.e., what Chomsky said.
  * The mind is a complex system composed of many interacting parts.
* how cognition andd emotion are implemented in the brain
    * Phineas Gage is mentioned here.
* behavioral genetics
* evolutionary psychology, the study of the phylogenetic history and adaptive functions of the mind

## 4. Culture vultures

Starts with a discussion of theory of mind, and from there diverges to a discussion of how
culture evolves via emulation and learning, with a smattering of game theory. Concludes
with a discussion of how some cultures advanced faster than others because they were in a
better position (typically geographic position) for interconnecting with and learning from
neighbors.

Concludes with a note about how great it is that we can simultaneously study multiple
layers of a problem, some more reductionist and some more high-level.

## 5. The slate's last stand

BK: up to p 90, this chapter had some surprisingly weak arguments; recommend the time-pressed reader skip it.

### genetics
About how there are fewer genes, by a certain count, than had been expected, by a certain
count. That opened the way to some people commenting on how this indicates that we're less
hard-wire structured than expected. He seems to be rebutting bloggers here.

### neural networks.
As of the writing in 2003, neural network research hadn't progressed very far and wasn't
doing incredibly well. Pinker concludes that it is too reductionist and can't work.

### neural plasticity
This is just another word for `learning', so why worry about it.

# Part II

BK: all of Part II is skippable.

Just as chapter 5 is a refutation of the extreme arguments from the reductionist side,
this entire part refutes extreme arguments from the side that pushes a virtuous soul,
including the Politically Correct who didn't fully understand the implications of
sociobiology and anthropology, and the religious right who fear that the soul will
disappear in a cloud of neurons. A lot of the people being refuted are extremists who
aren't worth the time and attention Pinker gives them.

# Part III

Things Pinker promises to refute:

* If people are innately different, oppression and discrimination would be justified.
* If people are innately immoral, hopes to improve the human condition would be futile.
* If people are products of biology, free will would be a myth and we could no longer hold people responsible for their actions.
* If people are products of biology, life would have no higher meaning and purpose.

## 8. fear of inequality

Addresses the first bullet point above. Finally, the Nazis show up. Pinker argues 
against guilt-by-association arguments ('the Nazis said this so it must be false').
He points out that other genocidal regimes actually believed the opposite line, that
man is born a blank slate, and still wound up in the same place. Also, thta Hitler 
probably read a lot of Marx.

## 9.

## 10. fear of determinism
Pinker dismisses that narratives about actions and retribution could be reduced to
neuronal activity, and stresses their import. Spends several pages on the importance of
retribution.  "The Victorian jurist James Stephen said that 'the criminal law bears the
same relation to the urge for revenge as marriage does to the sexual urge.' " [p 182]

By casting retribution as a necessary part of an attempt to turn 
rational agents' expected value calculations to the negative, a lot of ethical issues are
entirely side-stepped: it doesn't really matter if the person's soul chose to do it or
they were driven to it by a mechanistic brain, because both respond to incentives that
punish them for failing to conform to social ideals.

## 11. fear of nihilism
The argument seems to be: buck up and focus on the human scale. Don't be Woody Allen.

### Part IV know thyself

## 12. in touch w/reality

Relativists: they suck.

But the brain does twist reality, which we observe in optical illusions, at the least. So
let's not get too carried away.

Stereotypes of objectively measurable traits are often based on correct data. Pinker
doesn't seem to say much about judgment about subjective characteristics (incl. `is qualified').

Benjamin Whorf, student of Edward Sapir: "We cut nature up, organize it into concepts,
and ascribe significances as we do, largely because we are parties to an agreement to
organize it in this way — an agreement that holds throughout our speech community and
is codified in the patterns of our language. The agreement is, of course, an implicit
and unstated one, _but its terms are absolutely obligatory!_" [pp208-209]

Pinker misses a wonderful opportunity with an offhand line from Tommy, the
deaf-dumb-blind kid who plays pinball: ``Tommy doesn't know what day it is; he doesn't
know who Jesus was or what prayin’ is.'' How would Tommy learn abstractions like
these, and how would we verify that his abstraction matches that in the minds of
sighted/hearing people? Are `Christmas' and `pizza' equally markers for physical
categories; what about `reductionism'?

Dutch auctions are actually bona fide auctions, still used in the Dutch tulip market.

BK: this chapter hoplessly misses the point that images and categories can be influenced
by external use. The Coca Cola Corp desperately wants you to picture their product when
you think about `refreshment' or `thirst', and they seem largely successful with a broad
portion of the population. This doesn't make consumers 100% passive, but they're not 100%
in control either, as Pinker characterizes them. 

## 13. out of our depths

Opens with a really useful list of intuitive systems that seem innate [pp 220-1]:

"
* An intuitive physics, ...  not Newton's laws but something closer to the medieval conception of impetus.
* An intuitive version of biology or natural history, ... that living things house a hidden essence that gives them their form and powers and drives their growth and bodily functions.
* An intuitive engineering
* [A theory of mind]
* A spatial sense
* A number sense
* A sense of probability [BK: deeply flawed, as discussed in this chapter]
* An intuitive economics, ... based on the concept of reciprocal exchange.
* A mental database and logic, ...  based on assertions about what's what, what's where, or who did what to whom, when, where, and why. ... with logical and causal
operators such as and, or, not, all, some, necessary, possible, and cause.
* Language
"

The rest of the chapter talks about the policy implications of some of these:

* Education should be about all the things that are _not_ on the list, or directly condradict our intuition. Teach statistics, not trigonometry, Pinker suggests.

* A belief in the soul causes people to give in-or-out definitions for what should have rights and be defended in issues of abortion, euthenasia, and animal rights. But no one boundary is defensible, Pinker suggests, so the best we can do is pick the socially optimal boundary out of the given options.
 "bioethicist Ronald Green ... notes that the shift from finding boundaries to choosing boundaries is a conceptual revolution of Copernican
proportions. But the old conceptualization, which amounts to trying to pinpoint when the ghost enters the machine, is
scientifically untenable and has no business guiding policy in the twenty-first century." [p 229]

* Intuitions about essences and reproduction (which don't quite map to the list above) lead to people disliking GMOs and artificial flavors.

* We live in a world of market prices that are much more sophisticated than anything one could express via the simple exchange-for-equals intuition.

* There's an essay on how Malthus was wrong and better technology continues to save the day; I don't get how it fits in with the above.


### 14 many roots of our suffering

Game theory + genes

* As per _the selfish gene_, altruism can be a mixed Nash equilibrium.

* A lot of other attitudes toward sex can also be traced to maximizing
resources toward the babies that so frequently arise from sexual
contact. [combining with ch13, we conclude that Pinker believes that
schoolchildren should be taught out of their intuitions regarding sex.]

* Psychopathy is also a workable mixed Nash equilibrium, in a population of generally nice people.
A set of psychopathic traits seem to arise in some people as a set.

There's also something about self-delusion that doesn't seem to fit in with the genes and game theory theme.

### 15 sanctimonious animal

BK: Pinker really starts to get weird here in what he's judgy about. "Moral vegetarians
are more likely to think that other peopleshould be vegetarians," as if this is some
sort of magical thinking. "Smokers are banished and demonized, and the psychology of
disgust and contamination is brought into play." Yes, because smoke _smells_. He is
bothered that some things that have unpleasant externalities get enough press to get
"moral coloring" and others don't get that far in people's consciousness.

Other chapters cover where a common human characteristic comes from in terms of brain
structure or game theory or genetics. But Pinker doesn't explain where moralizing
comes from, just that it is stupendously common. He implies that it's on the rise,
with lists of things that have recently become uncool, but it seems to be as much a
universal as the other things he discusses.



