# arendts_condition
Notes on Hanna Arendt's _Human Condition_ for our book group

## 0 Prologue

¡Sputnik!

Interesting: "This future man, whom the scientists tell us they will produce in no more than a hundred years, seems to be possessed by a rebellion against human existence as it has been given, a free gift from nowhere (secularly speaking), which he wishes to exchange, as it were, for something he has made himself." [Prologue 2]

Interesting: "Men in the plural, that is, men in so far as they live and move and act in this world, can experience meaningfulness only because they can talk with and make sense to each other and to themselves." [Prologue 4]

## I The human condition

Arendt introduces the difference between labor, work, and action.


#### 2. the term _vita activa_

"This is mortality: to move along a rectilinear line in a universe where everything, if it
moves at all, moves in a cyclical order." [p 19]

## II The public and private realm

Labor (the unpleasant necessities) is pushed to the private realm, and ideally to slaves.

#### 5. the _polis_ and the household

#### 8 The private realm: property

In which "privacy" is linked back to (social) deprivation.

Over the course of this, property slides from being a piece of land, and therefore a
physical place in the public realm, to being mountains of things.

## III Labor

"In the following chapter, Karl Marx will be criticized." [p 79]

#### 11 "The labour of our body and the work of our hands"

p. 80: every European language has two terms corresponding to labor and work.

Arendt begins to refer to _animal laborans_ and _homo faber_. pp 83--84 discuss how being
forced to deal with necessity is effectively being enslaved; having slaves do the work
lifted the slave owners into freedom.

## IV Work

#### 13 Labor and life

Labor is tied in with the cyclical and short-lived; work is linear (the thing you are
        making is eventually done) and more persistent.

Things that are necessary for life are expected to be more ephemeral than we are---if we
don't eat it, it should rot away. Perhaps this is the intuition underlying the aversion to perservative-heavy food.

"A philosophy of life that does not arrive, as did Nietzsche, at the affirmation of
'eternal recurrence' (_ewige Wiederkehr_) as the highest principle of all being, simply
does not know what it is talking about." [p 97]

#### 14 Labor and fertility

"The sudden, spectacular rise of labor" from a thing that slaves do to the source of all
value under some economic theories, "began when Locke discovered that labor is the source
of all property." [p 101]. This sentence makes sense only after property transitioned from
land to mountains of things.

#### 17 A consumers' society

On lying (aka fabrication) requiring an element of freedom:
"'the belief that a slave is unable to tell the truth except on the rack' (Barrow, op cit
p 31)—is quite erroneous. The belief, on the contrary, is that nobody can invent a lie
under torture." [p 129]

"The hope that inspired Marx ... rests on the illusion of a mechanistic philosophy which
assumes that labor power, like any other energy, can never be lost, so that if it is not
spent and exhausted in the drudgery of life it will automatically nourish other, 'higher', activities." [p 133, on Marx predating the invention of television]

#### 22 The exchange market

p 164, on the subjectivity of value ⇒ with no public realm, there are no prices.

## V Action

#### 31 The traditional substitution of making for acting

"The classic author on this matter is still Adam Smith, to whom the only legitimate
function of government is 'the defence of the rich against the poor, or of those who have
some property against those who have none at all.' (op.cit., II, 198ff; for the quotation see II, 203)." [p 220, fn56.]

#### 32 The process character of action

Because action is social, and we can't control others, all action has unpredictable
consequences. "Nowehere, in other words, ... does man appear to be less free than in those
capacities whose very essence is freedom." [p 234]

#### 33 Irreversibility and the power to forgive

A follow-up to 32, that things set in a bad course can more or less be forgiven and
forgotten.

"men are unable to forgive what they cannot punish and that they are unable to punish what
has turned out to be unforgivable" [p 241], which Arendt uses to define "radical evil".

## VI The _vita activa_ and the modern age

"He found the Archimedian point, but he used it against himself; it seems that he was
permitted to find it only under this condition." F Kafka, p 248. This opening is so
perfect that I wonder which came first, Arendt seeing this line or Arendt writing the
chapter.

#### 35 World alienation (⇐band name idea)

p 255, footnote 5 advocates for a guaranteed minimum wage.

#### 36 The discovery of the Archimedean point

In which the telescope is credited with ushering in modernity

#### 37 Universial versus natural science

"the curious discrepancy between the mood of modern philosophy, which from the beginning
had been predominantly pessimistic, and the mood of modern science, which until very
recently had been so bouyantly optimistic, has been bridged. There seems to be little
cheerfulness left in either of them." [p 273]

#### 38 The rise of Cartesian doubt

In which Descartes introduces fundamental doubt.

"intelligibility to human understanding does not at all constitute a demonstration of
truth, just as visibility did not at all constitute proof of reality." [p 275]

#### 39 introspection and the loss of common sense

#### 40 Thought and the modern world

"the systems of non-Euclidian mathematics were found without any forethought of
applicability or even empirical meaning before they gained their surprising validity in
Einstein's theory" [p 285] but the simplest non-Euclidian geometry is geometry on a
sphere, which had practical geo-metric application.

#### 41 The reversal of contemplation and action

"the watch... was not invented for purposes of practical life, but exclusively for the
highly 'theoretical' purpose of conducting certain experiments with nature." [CITATION
NEEDED] [p 289]

#### 43 The defeat of _homo faber_ and the principle of happiness

"only one who is in pain really senses nothing but himself." [p 310]

"for no matter how current certain ideas might be during a given period, there never are
two philosophers who could arrive at identical formulations without copying from each
other." [p 311, fn 74]

#### 44 Life as the highest good

Christian doctrine "had reversed the ancient relationship between man and world and
promoted the most mortal thing, human life, to the position of immortality" [p 314]

p 319: the thread of Cartesian doubt and religious (esp Christian) belief are
fundamentally at odds. (⇒current U.S. political polarization)
